# Properties

> A *property* is a `var` or `val` that’s part of a class.

Defining a property *maintains state* within a class. Maintaining state is the primary motivating reason for creating a class rather than just writing one or more standalone functions.

A `var` property can be reassigned, while a `val` property can’t. Each object gets its own storage for properties:

```
// Properties/Cup.kt

class Cup {
  var percentFull = 0
}

fun main() {
  val c1 = Cup()
  c1.percentFull = 50
  val c2 = Cup()
  c2.percentFull = 100

  println(c1.percentFull)
  println(c2.percentFull)
}
/* Output:
50
100
*/
```

Defining a `var` or `val` inside a class looks just like defining it within a function. However, the `var` or `val` becomes *part* of that class, and you must refer to it by specifying its object using *dot notation*, placing a dot between the object and the name of the property. You can see dot notation used for each reference to `percentFull`.

The `percentFull` property represents the state of the corresponding `Cup` object. `c1.percentFull` and `c2.percentFull` contain different values, showing that each object has its own storage.

A member function can refer to a property within its object without using dot notation (that is, without *qualifying* it):

```
// Properties/Cup2.kt

class Cup2 {
  var percentFull = 0
  val max = 100
  fun add(increase: Int): Int {
    percentFull += increase
    if (percentFull > max)
      percentFull = max
    return percentFull
  }
}

fun main() {
  val cup = Cup2()
  cup.add(50)
  println(cup.percentFull)
  cup.add(70)
  println(cup.percentFull)
}
/* Output:
50
100
*/
```

The `add()` member function tries to add `increase` to `percentFull` but ensures that it doesn’t go past 100%.

You must qualify both properties and member functions from outside a class.

You can define top-level properties:

```
// Properties/TopLevelProperty.kt

val constant = 42

var counter = 0

fun inc() {
  counter++
}
```

Defining a top-level `val` is safe because it cannot be modified. However, defining a mutable (`var`) top-level property is considered an *anti-pattern*. As your program becomes more complicated, it becomes harder to reason correctly about *shared mutable state*. If everyone in your code base can access the `var counter`, you can’t guarantee it will change correctly: while `inc()` increases `counter` by one, some other part of the program might decrease `counter` by ten, producing obscure bugs. It’s best to guard mutable state within a class. In [Constraining Visibility](javascript:void(0)) you’ll see how to make it truly hidden.

To say that `var`s can be changed while `val`s cannot is an oversimplification. As an analogy, consider a `house` as a `val`, and a `sofa` inside the `house` as a `var`. You can modify `sofa` because it’s a `var`. You can’t reassign `house`, though, because it’s a `val`:

```
// Properties/ChangingAVal.kt

class House {
  var sofa: String = ""
}

fun main() {
  val house = House()
  house.sofa = "Simple sleeper sofa: $89.00"
  println(house.sofa)
  house.sofa = "New leather sofa: $3,099.00"
  println(house.sofa)
  // Cannot reassign the val to a new House:
  // house = House()
}
/* Output:
Simple sleeper sofa: $89.00
New leather sofa: $3,099.00
*/
```

Although `house` is a `val`, its object can be modified because `sofa` in `class House` is a `var`. Defining `house` as a `val` only prevents it from being reassigned to a new object.

If we make a property a `val`, it cannot be reassigned:

```
// Properties/AnUnchangingVar.kt

class Sofa {
  val cover: String = "Loveseat cover"
}

fun main() {
  var sofa = Sofa()
  // Not allowed:
  // sofa.cover = "New cover"
  // Reassigning a var:
  sofa = Sofa()
}
```

Even though `sofa` is a `var`, its object cannot be modified because `cover` in `class Sofa` is a `val`. However, `sofa` can be reassigned to a new object.

We’ve talked about identifiers like `house` and `sofa` as if they were objects. They are actually *references* to objects. One way to see this is to observe that two identifiers can refer to the same object:

```
// Properties/References.kt

class Kitchen {
  var table: String = "Round table"
}

fun main() {
  val kitchen1 = Kitchen()
  val kitchen2 = kitchen1
  println("kitchen1: ${kitchen1.table}")
  println("kitchen2: ${kitchen2.table}")
  kitchen1.table = "Square table"
  println("kitchen1: ${kitchen1.table}")
  println("kitchen2: ${kitchen2.table}")
}
/* Output:
kitchen1: Round table
kitchen2: Round table
kitchen1: Square table
kitchen2: Square table
*/
```

When `kitchen1` modifies `table`, `kitchen2` sees the modification. `kitchen1.table` and `kitchen2.table` display the same output.

Remember that `var` and `val` control references rather than objects. A `var` allows you to rebind a reference to a different object, and a `val` prevents you from doing so.

*Mutability* means an object can change its state. In the examples above, `class House` and `class Kitchen` define mutable objects while `class Sofa` defines immutable objects.

***Exercises and solutions can be found at www.AtomicKotlin.com.***