# Creating Classes

> Not only can you use predefined types like `IntRange` and `String`, you can also create your own types of objects.

Indeed, creating new types comprises much of the activity in object-oriented programming. You create new types by defining *classes*.

An object is a piece of the solution for a problem you’re trying to solve. Start by thinking of objects as expressing concepts. As a first approximation, if you discover a “thing” in your problem, represent that thing as an object in your solution.

Suppose you want to create a program to manage animals in a zoo. It makes sense to categorize the different types of animals based on how they behave, their needs, animals they get along with and those they fight with. Everything different about a species of animal is captured in the classification of that animal’s object. Kotlin uses the `class` keyword to create a new type of object:

```
// CreatingClasses/Animals.kt

// Create some classes:
class Giraffe
class Bear
class Hippo

fun main() {
  // Create some objects:
  val g1 = Giraffe()
  val g2 = Giraffe()
  val b = Bear()
  val h = Hippo()

  // Each object() is unique:
  println(g1)
  println(g2)
  println(h)
  println(b)
}
/* Sample output:
Giraffe@28d93b30
Giraffe@1b6d3586
Hippo@4554617c
Bear@74a14482
*/
```

To define a class, start with the `class` keyword, followed by an identifier for your new class. The class name must begin with a letter (A-Z, upper or lower case), but can include things like numbers and underscores. Following convention, we capitalize the first letter of a class name, and lowercase the first letter of all `val`s and `var`s.

`Animals.kt` starts by defining three new classes, then creates four objects (also called *instances*) of those classes.

`Giraffe` is a class, but a particular five-year-old male giraffe that lives in Botswana is an *object.* Each object is different from all others, so we give them names like `g1` and `g2`.

Notice the rather cryptic output of the last four lines. The part before the `@` is the class name, and the number after the `@` is the address where the object is located in your computer’s memory. Yes, that’s a number even though it includes some letters—it’s called [“hexadecimal notation”](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Hexadecimal). Every object in your program has its own unique address.

The classes defined here (`Giraffe`, `Bear`, and `Hippo`) are as simple as possible: the entire class definition is a single line. More complex classes use curly braces (`{` and `}`) to create a *class body* containing the characteristics and behaviors for that class.

A function defined within a class belongs to that class. In Kotlin, we call these *member functions* of the class. Some object-oriented languages like Java choose to call them *methods*, a term that came from early object-oriented languages like Smalltalk. To emphasize the functional nature of Kotlin, the designers chose to drop the term *method*, as some beginners found the distinction confusing. Instead, the term *function* is used throughout the language.

If it is unambiguous, we will just say “function.” If we must make the distinction:

- *Member* functions belong to a class.
- *Top-level* functions exist by themselves and are not part of a class.

Here, `bark()` belongs to the `Dog` class:

```
// CreatingClasses/Dog.kt

class Dog {
  fun bark() = "yip!"
}

fun main() {
  val dog = Dog()
}
```

In `main()`, we create a `Dog` object and assign it to `val dog`. Kotlin emits a warning because we never use `dog`.

Member functions are called (*invoked*) with the object name, followed by a `.` (dot/period), followed by the function name and parameter list. Here we call the `meow()` function and display the result:

```
// CreatingClasses/Cat.kt

class Cat {
  fun meow() = "mrrrow!"
}

fun main() {
  val cat = Cat()
  // Call 'meow()' for 'cat':
  val m1 = cat.meow()
  println(m1)
}
/* Output:
mrrrow!
*/
```

A member function acts on a particular instance of a class. When you call `meow()`, you must call it with an object. During the call, `meow()` can access other members of that object.

When calling a member function, Kotlin keeps track of the object of interest by silently passing a reference to that object. That reference is available inside the member function by using the keyword `this`.

Member functions have special access to other elements within a class, simply by naming those elements. You can also explicitly *qualify* access to those elements using `this`. Here, `exercise()` calls `speak()` with and without qualification:

```
// CreatingClasses/Hamster.kt

class Hamster {
  fun speak() = "Squeak! "
  fun exercise() =
    this.speak() +   // Qualified with 'this'
      speak() +      // Without 'this'
      "Running on wheel"
}

fun main() {
  val hamster = Hamster()
  println(hamster.exercise())
}
/* Output:
Squeak! Squeak! Running on wheel
*/
```

In `exercise()`, we call `speak()` first with an explicit `this` and then omit the qualification.

Sometimes you’ll see code containing an unnecessary explicit `this`. That kind of code often comes from programmers who know a different language where `this` is either required, or part of its style. Using a feature unnecessarily is confusing for the reader, who spends time trying to figure out why you’re doing it. We recommend avoiding the unnecessary use of `this`.

Outside the class, you must say `hamster.exercise()` and `hamster.speak()`.

***Exercises and solutions can be found at www.AtomicKotlin.com.***