# Constraining Visibility

> If you leave a piece of code for a few days or weeks, then come back to it, you might see a much better way to write it.

This is one of the prime motivations for *refactoring*, which rewrites working code to make it more readable, understandable, and thus maintainable.

There is a tension in this desire to change and improve your code. Consumers (*client programmers*) require aspects of your code to be stable. You want to change it, and they want it to stay the same.

This is particularly important for libraries. Consumers of a library don’t want to rewrite code for a new version of that library. However, the library creator must be free to make modifications and improvements, with the certainty that the client code won’t be affected by those changes.

Therefore, a primary consideration in software design is:

> *Separate things that change from things that stay the same.*

To control visibility, Kotlin and some other languages provide *access modifiers*. Library creators decide what is and is not accessible by the client programmer using the modifiers `public`, `private`, `protected`, and `internal`. This atom covers `public` and `private`, with a brief introduction to `internal`. We explain `protected` later in the book.

An access modifier such as `private` appears before the definition for a class, function, or property. An access modifier only controls access for that particular definition.

A `public` definition is accessible by client programmers, so changes to that definition impact client code directly. If you don’t provide a modifier, your definition is automatically `public`, so `public` is technically redundant. You will sometimes still specify `public` for the sake of clarity.

A `private` definition is hidden and only accessible from other members of the same class. Changing, or even removing, a `private` definition doesn’t directly impact client programmers.

`private` classes, top-level functions, and top-level properties are accessible only inside that file:

```
// Visibility/RecordAnimals.kt

private var index = 0                  // [1]

private class Animal(val name: String) // [2]

private fun recordAnimal(              // [3]
  animal: Animal
) {
  println("Animal #$index: ${animal.name}")
  index++
}

fun recordAnimals() {
  recordAnimal(Animal("Tiger"))
  recordAnimal(Animal("Antelope"))
}

fun recordAnimalsCount() {
  println("$index animals are here!")
}
```

You can access `private` top-level properties (**[1]**), classes (**[2]**), and functions (**[3]**) from other functions and classes within `RecordAnimals.kt`. Kotlin prevents you from accessing a `private` top-level element from within another file, telling you it’s `private` in the file:

```
// Visibility/ObserveAnimals.kt

fun main() {
  // Can't access private members
  // declared in another file.
  // Class is private:
  // val rabbit = Animal("Rabbit")
  // Function is private:
  // recordAnimal(rabbit)
  // Property is private:
  // index++

  recordAnimals()
  recordAnimalsCount()
}
/* Output:
Animal #0: Tiger
Animal #1: Antelope
2 animals are here!
*/
```

Privacy is most commonly used for members of a class:

```
// Visibility/Cookie.kt

class Cookie(
  private var isReady: Boolean  // [1]
) {
  private fun crumble() =       // [2]
    println("crumble")

  public fun bite() =           // [3]
    println("bite")

  fun eat() {                   // [4]
    isReady = true              // [5]
    crumble()
    bite()
  }
}

fun main() {
  val x = Cookie(false)
  x.bite()
  // Can't access private members:
  // x.isReady
  // x.crumble()
  x.eat()
}
/* Output:
bite
crumble
bite
*/
```

- **[1]** A `private` property, not accessible outside the containing class.
- **[2]** A `private` member function.
- **[3]** A `public` member function, accessible to anyone.
- **[4]** No access modifier means `public`.
- **[5]** Only members of the same class can access `private` members.

The `private` keyword means no one can access that member except other members of that class. Other classes cannot access `private` members, so it’s as if you’re also insulating the class against yourself and your collaborators. With `private`, you can freely change that member without worrying whether it affects another class in the same package. As a library designer you’ll typically keep things as `private` as possible, and expose only functions and classes to client programmers.

Any member function that is a *helper function* for a class can be made `private` to ensure you don’t accidentally use it elsewhere in the package and thus prohibit yourself from changing or removing that function.

The same is true for a `private` property inside a class. Unless you must expose the underlying implementation (which is less likely than you might think), make properties `private`. However, just because a reference to an object is `private` inside a class doesn’t mean some other object can’t have a `public` reference to the same object:

```
// Visibility/MultipleRef.kt

class Counter(var start: Int) {
  fun increment() {
    start += 1
  }
  override fun toString() = start.toString()
}

class CounterHolder(counter: Counter) {
  private val ctr = counter
  override fun toString() =
    "CounterHolder: " + ctr
}

fun main() {
  val c = Counter(11)                 // [1]
  val ch = CounterHolder(c)           // [2]
  println(ch)
  c.increment()                       // [3]
  println(ch)
  val ch2 = CounterHolder(Counter(9)) // [4]
  println(ch2)
}
/* Output:
CounterHolder: 11
CounterHolder: 12
CounterHolder: 9
*/
```

- **[1]** `c` is now defined in the scope *surrounding* the creation of the `CounterHolder` object on the following line.
- **[2]** Passing `c` as the argument to the `CounterHolder` constructor means that the new `CounterHolder` now refers to the same `Counter` object that `c` refers to.
- **[3]** The `Counter` that is supposedly `private` inside `ch` can still be manipulated via `c`.
- **[4]** `Counter(9)` has no other references except within `CounterHolder`, so it cannot be accessed or modified by anything except `ch2`.

Maintaining multiple references to a single object is called *aliasing* and can produce surprising behavior.

### Modules

Unlike the small examples in this book, real programs are often large. It can be helpful to divide such programs into one or more *modules*. A module is a logically independent part of a codebase. The way you divide a project into modules depends on the build system (such as [Gradle](https://gradle.org/) or [Maven](https://maven.apache.org/)) and is beyond the scope of this book.

An `internal` definition is accessible only inside the module where it is defined. `internal` lands somewhere between `private` and `public`—use it when `private` is too restrictive but you don’t want an element to be a part of the `public` API. We do not use `internal` in the book’s examples or exercises.

Modules are a higher-level concept. The following atom introduces *packages*, which enable finer-grained structuring. A library is often a single module consisting of multiple packages, so `internal` elements are available within the library but are not accessible by consumers of that library.

***Exercises and solutions can be found at www.AtomicKotlin.com.***