# Nullable Types

> Consider a function that sometimes produces “no result.” When this happens, the function doesn’t produce an error per se. Nothing went wrong, there’s just “no answer.”

A good example is retrieving a value from a `Map`. If the `Map` doesn’t contain a value for a given key, it can’t give you an answer and returns a `null` reference to indicate “no value”:

```
// NullableTypes/NullInMaps.kt
import atomictest.eq

fun main() {
  val map = mapOf(0 to "yes", 1 to "no")
  map[2] eq null
}
```

Languages like Java allow a result to be either `null` or a meaningful value. Unfortunately, if you treat `null` the same way you treat a meaningful value, you get a dramatic failure (In Java, this produces a `NullPointerException`; in a more primitive language like C, a `null` pointer can crash the process or even the operating system or machine). The creator of the `null` reference, [Tony Hoare](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Tony_Hoare), refers to it as “my billion-dollar mistake” (although it has arguably cost much more than that).

One possible solution to this problem is for a language to never allow `null`s in the first place, and instead introduce a special “no value” indicator. Kotlin might have done this, except that it must interact with Java, and Java uses `null`s.

Kotlin’s solution is arguably the best compromise: types default to non-nullable. However, if something can produce a `null` result, you must append a question mark to the type name to explicitly tag that result as nullable:

```
// NullableTypes/NullableTypes.kt
import atomictest.eq

fun main() {
  val s1 = "abc"             // [1]

  // Compile-time error:
  // val s2: String = null   // [2]

  // Nullable definitions:
  val s3: String? = null     // [3]
  val s4: String? = s1       // [4]

  // Compile-time error:
  // val s5: String = s4     // [5]
  val s6 = s4                // [6]

  s1 eq "abc"
  s3 eq null
  s4 eq "abc"
  s6 eq "abc"
}
```

- **[1]** `s1` can’t contain a `null` reference. All the `var`s and `val`s we’ve created in the book so far are automatically non-nullable.
- **[2]** The error message is: *null can not be a value of a non-null type String*.
- **[3]** To define an identifier that can contain a `null` reference, you put a `?` at the end of the type name. Such an identifier can contain either `null` or a regular value.
- **[4]** Both `null`s and regular non-nullable values can be stored in a nullable type.
- **[5]** You can’t assign an identifier of a nullable type to an identifier of a non-null type. Kotlin emits: *Type mismatch: inferred type is String? but String was expected.* Even if the actual value is non-null as in this case (we know it’s `"abc"`), Kotlin won’t allow it because they are two different types.
- **[6]** If you use type inference, Kotlin produces the appropriate type. Here, `s6` is nullable because `s4` is nullable.

Even though it looks like we just modify an existing type by adding a `?` at the end, we’re actually specifying a *different type*. For example, `String` and `String?` are two different types. The `String?` type forbids the operations in lines **[2]** and **[5]**, thus guaranteeing that a value of a non-nullable type is never `null`.

Retrieving a value from a `Map` using square brackets produces a nullable result, because the underlying `Map` implementation comes from Java:

```
// NullableTypes/NullableInMap.kt
import atomictest.eq

fun main() {
  val map = mapOf(0 to "yes", 1 to "no")
  val first: String? = map[0]
  val second: String? = map[2]
  first eq "yes"
  second eq null
}
```

Why is it important to know that a value can’t be `null`? Many operations implicitly assume a non-nullable result. For example, calling a member function will fail with an exception if the receiver value is `null`. In Java such a call will fail with a `NullPointerException` (often abbreviated *NPE*). Because almost any value can be `null` in Java, any function invocation can fail this way. In these cases you must write code to check for `null` results, or rely on other parts of the code to guard against `null`s.

In Kotlin you can’t simply *dereference* (call a member function or access a member property) a value of a nullable type:

```
// NullableTypes/Dereference.kt
import atomictest.eq

fun main() {
  val s1: String = "abc"
  val s2: String? = s1

  s1.length eq 3         // [1]
  // Doesn't compile:
  // s2.length           // [2]
}
```

You can access members of a non-nullable type as in **[1]**. If you reference members of a nullable type, as in **[2]**, Kotlin emits an error.

Values of most types are stored as references to the objects in memory. That’s the meaning of the term *dereference*—to access an object, you retrieve its value from memory.

The most straightforward way to ensure that dereferencing a nullable type won’t throw a `NullPointerException` is to explicitly check that the reference is not `null`:

```
// NullableTypes/ExplicitCheck.kt
import atomictest.eq

fun main() {
  val s: String? = "abc"
  if (s != null)
    s.length eq 3
}
```

After the explicit `if`-check, Kotlin allows you to dereference a nullable. But writing this `if` whenever you work with nullable types is too noisy for such a common operation. Kotlin has concise syntax to alleviate this problem, which you’ll learn about in subsequent atoms.

Whenever you create a new class, Kotlin automatically includes nullable and non-nullable types:

```
// NullableTypes/Amphibian.kt
package nullabletypes

class Amphibian

enum class Species {
  Frog, Toad, Salamander, Caecilian
}

fun main() {
  val a1: Amphibian = Amphibian()
  val a2: Amphibian? = null
  val at1: Species = Species.Toad
  val at2: Species? = null
}
```

As you can see, we didn’t do anything special to produce the complementary nullable types—they’re available by default.

***Exercises and solutions can be found at www.AtomicKotlin.com.***