# Extensions for Nullable Types

> Sometimes it’s not what it looks like.

`s?.f()` implies that `s` is nullable—otherwise you could simply call `s.f()`. Similarly, `t.f()` seems to imply that `t` is non-nullable because Kotlin doesn’t require a safe call or programmatic check. However, `t` is not necessarily non-nullable.

The Kotlin standard library provides `String` extension functions, including:

- `isNullOrEmpty()`: Tests whether the receiver `String` is `null` or empty.
- `isNullOrBlank()`: Performs the same check as `isNullOrEmpty()` *and* allows the receiver `String` to consist solely of whitespace characters, including tabs (`\t`) and newlines (`\n`).

Here’s a basic test of these functions:

```
// NullableExtensions/StringIsNullOr.kt
import atomictest.eq

fun main() {
  val s1: String? = null
  s1.isNullOrEmpty() eq true
  s1.isNullOrBlank() eq true

  val s2 = ""
  s2.isNullOrEmpty() eq true
  s2.isNullOrBlank() eq true

  val s3: String = " \t\n"
  s3.isNullOrEmpty() eq false
  s3.isNullOrBlank() eq true
}
```

The function names suggest they are for nullable types. However, even though `s1` is nullable, you can call `isNullOrEmpty()` or `isNullOrBlank()` without a safe call or explicit check. That’s because these are extension functions on the nullable type `String?`.

We can rewrite `isNullOrEmpty()` as a non-extension function that takes the nullable `String s` as a parameter:

```
// NullableExtensions/NullableParameter.kt
package nullableextensions
import atomictest.eq

fun isNullOrEmpty(s: String?): Boolean =
  s == null || s.isEmpty()

fun main() {
  isNullOrEmpty(null) eq true
  isNullOrEmpty("") eq true
}
```

Because `s` is nullable, we explicitly check for `null` or empty. The expression `s == null || s.isEmpty()` uses *short-circuiting*: if the first part of the expression is `true`, the rest of the expression is not evaluated, thus preventing a `null` pointer exception.

Extension functions use `this` to represent the receiver (the object of the type being extended). To make the receiver nullable, add `?` to the type being extended:

```
// NullableExtensions/NullableExtension.kt
package nullableextensions
import atomictest.eq

fun String?.isNullOrEmpty(): Boolean =
  this == null || isEmpty()

fun main() {
  "".isNullOrEmpty() eq true
}
```

`isNullOrEmpty()` is more readable as an extension function.

- \-

Take care when using extensions for nullable types. They are great for simple cases like `isNullOrEmpty()` and `isNullOrBlank()`, especially with self-explanatory names that imply the receiver might be `null`. In general, it’s better to declare regular (non-nullable) extensions. Safe calls and explicit checks clarify the receiver’s nullability, while extensions for nullable types may conceal nullability and confuse the reader of your code (probably, “future you”).

***Exercises and solutions can be found at www.AtomicKotlin.com.***