# The Importance of Lambdas

> Lambdas may seem like syntax sugar, but they provide important power to your programming.

Code often manipulates the contents of a collection, and typically repeats these manipulations with minor modifications. Consider selecting elements from a collection, such as people under a given age, employees with a specific role, citizens of a particular city, or unfinished orders. Here’s an example that selects even numbers from a list. Suppose we don’t have a rich library of functions for working with collections—we’d have to implement our own `filterEven()` operation:

```
// ImportanceOfLambdas/FilterEven.kt
package importanceoflambdas
import atomictest.eq

fun filterEven(nums: List<Int>): List<Int> {
  val result = mutableListOf<Int>()
  for (i in nums) {
    if (i % 2 == 0) {    // [1]
      result += i
    }
  }
  return result
}

fun main() {
  filterEven(listOf(1, 2, 3, 4)) eq
    listOf(2, 4)
}
```

If an element has a remainder of 0 when divided by 2, it’s appended to the result.

Imagine you need something similar, but for numbers that are greater than 2. You can copy `filterEven()` and modify the small part that chooses the elements included in the result:

```
// ImportanceOfLambdas/GreaterThan2.kt
package importanceoflambdas
import atomictest.eq

fun greaterThan2(nums: List<Int>): List<Int> {
  val result = mutableListOf<Int>()
  for (i in nums) {
    if (i > 2) {         // [1]
      result += i
    }
  }
  return result
}

fun main() {
  greaterThan2(listOf(1, 2, 3, 4)) eq
    listOf(3, 4)
}
```

The only notable difference between the previous two examples is the line of code (**[1]** in both cases) specifying the desired elements.

With lambdas, we can use the same function for both cases. The standard library function `filter()` takes a predicate specifying the elements you want to preserve, and this predicate can be a lambda:

```
// ImportanceOfLambdas/Filter.kt
import atomictest.eq

fun main() {
  val list = listOf(1, 2, 3, 4)
  val even = list.filter { it % 2 == 0 }
  val greaterThan2 = list.filter { it > 2 }
  even eq listOf(2, 4)
  greaterThan2 eq listOf(3, 4)
}
```

Now we have clear, concise code that avoids repetition. Both `even` and `greaterThan2` use `filter()` and differ only in the predicate. `filter()` has been heavily tested, so you’re less likely to introduce a bug.

Notice that `filter()` handles the iteration that would otherwise require handwritten code. Although managing the iteration yourself might not seem like much effort, it’s one more error-prone detail and one more place to make a mistake. Because they’re so “obvious,” such mistakes are particularly hard to find.

This is one of the hallmarks of *functional programming*, of which `map()` and `filter()` are examples. Functional programming solves problems in small steps. The functions often do things that seem trivial—it’s not that hard to write your own code rather than using `map()` and `filter()`. However, once you have a collection of these small, debugged solutions, you can easily combine them without debugging at every level. This allows you to create more robust code, more quickly.

You can store a lambda in a `var` or `val`. This allows reuse of that lambda’s logic, by passing it as an argument to different functions:

```
// ImportanceOfLambdas/StoringLambda.kt
import atomictest.eq

fun main() {
  val list = listOf(1, 2, 3, 4)
  val isEven = { e: Int -> e % 2 == 0 }
  list.filter(isEven) eq listOf(2, 4)
  list.any(isEven) eq true
}
```

`isEven` checks whether a number is even, and this reference is passed as an argument to both `filter()` and `any()`. The library function `any()` checks whether there’s at least one element in the `List` satisfying a given predicate. When we define `isEven` we must specify the parameter type because there is no context for the type inferencer.

Another important quality of lambdas is the ability to refer to elements outside their scope. When a function “closes over” or “captures” the elements in its environment, we call it a *closure*.  Unfortunately, some languages conflate the term “closure” with the idea of a lambda. The two concepts are completely distinct: you can have lambdas without closures, and closures without lambdas.

When a language supports closures, it “just works” the way you expect:

```
// ImportanceOfLambdas/Closures.kt
import atomictest.eq

fun main() {
  val list = listOf(1, 5, 7, 10)
  val divider = 5
  list.filter { it % divider == 0 } eq
    listOf(5, 10)
}
```

Here, the lambda “captures” the `val divider` that is defined outside the lambda. The lambda not only reads captured elements, it can also modify them:

```
// ImportanceOfLambdas/Closures2.kt
import atomictest.eq

fun main() {
  val list = listOf(1, 5, 7, 10)
  var sum = 0
  val divider = 5
  list.filter { it % divider == 0 }
    .forEach { sum += it }
  sum eq 15
}
```

The `forEach()` library function applies the specified action to each element of the collection.

Although you can capture the mutable variable `sum` as in `Closures2.kt`, you can usually change your code and avoid modifying the state of your environment:

```
// ImportanceOfLambdas/Sum.kt
import atomictest.eq

fun main() {
  val list = listOf(1, 5, 7, 10)
  val divider = 5
  list.filter { it % divider == 0 }
    .sum() eq 15
}
```

`sum()` works on a list of numbers, adding all the elements in the list.

An ordinary function can also close over surrounding elements:

```
// ImportanceOfLambdas/FunctionClosure.kt
package importanceoflambdas
import atomictest.eq

var x = 100

fun useX() {
  x++
}

fun main() {
  useX()
  x eq 101
}
```

`useX()` captures and modifies `x` from its surroundings.

***Exercises and solutions can be found at www.AtomicKotlin.com.***