# Lazy Initialization

> So far, you’ve learned two ways to initialize properties.

1. Store the initial value at the point of definition, or in the constructor.
2. Define a custom getter that computes the property for each access.

This atom explores a third use case: costly initialization that you might not need right away, or ever. For example:

- Complex and time-consuming calculations
- Network requests
- Database access

This can produce two problems:

1. Long application start-up time.
2. Performing unnecessary work for a property that is never used, or that can have delayed access.

This happens frequently enough that Kotlin includes a built-in solution. A `lazy` property is initialized when it’s first used, rather than when it’s created. If we never use a `lazy` property, it never performs that expensive initialization.

The concept of `lazy` properties isn’t unique to Kotlin. Laziness can be implemented within other languages, whether or not they provide direct support. Kotlin provides a consistent, recognizable idiom for such properties using [property delegation](javascript:void(0)). With a `lazy` property, `by` is followed by a call to `lazy()`:

```
val lazyProperty by lazy { initializer }
```

`lazy()` takes a lambda containing the initialization logic. As usual, the last expression in the lambda becomes the result, which is assigned to the property:

```
// LazyInitialization/LazySyntax.kt
package lazyinitialization
import atomictest.*

val idle: String by lazy {
  trace("Initializing 'idle'")
  "I'm never used"
}

val helpful: String by lazy {
  trace("Initializing 'helpful'")
  "I'm helping!"
}

fun main() {
  trace(helpful)
  trace eq """
    Initializing 'helpful'
    I'm helping!
  """
}
```

The `idle` property isn’t initialized because it’s never accessed.

Notice that both `helpful` and `idle` are `val`s. Without `lazy` initialization, you’d be forced to make them `var`s, producing less-reliable code.

We can see all the work that `lazy` initialization does for you by implementing the behavior for an `Int` property without it:

```
// LazyInitialization/LazyInt.kt
package lazyinitialization
import atomictest.*

class LazyInt(val init: () -> Int) {
  private var helper: Int? = null
  val value: Int
    get() {
      if (helper == null)
        helper = init()
      return helper!!
    }
}

fun main() {
  val later = LazyInt {
    trace("Initializing 'later'")
    5
  }
  trace("First 'value' access:")
  trace(later.value)
  trace("Second 'value' access:")
  trace(later.value)
  trace eq """
    First 'value' access:
    Initializing 'later'
    5
    Second 'value' access:
    5
  """
}
```

The `value` property doesn’t store a value, but instead has a getter that retrieves the value from the `helper` property. This is similar to the code Kotlin generates for `lazy`.

Now we can compare the three ways to initialize a property—at the point of definition, using a getter, and using `lazy` initialization:

```
// LazyInitialization/PropertyOptions.kt
package lazyinitialization
import atomictest.trace

fun compute(i: Int): Int {
  trace("Compute $i")
  return i
}

object Properties {
  val atDefinition = compute(1)
  val getter
    get() = compute(2)
  val lazyInit by lazy { compute(3) }
  val never by lazy { compute(4) }
}

fun main() {
  listOf(
    Properties::atDefinition,
    Properties::getter,
    Properties::lazyInit
  ).forEach {
    trace("${it.name}:")
    trace("${it.get()}")
    trace("${it.get()}")
  }
  trace eq """
    Compute 1
    atDefinition:
    1
    1
    getter:
    Compute 2
    2
    Compute 2
    2
    lazyInit:
    Compute 3
    3
    3
  """
}
```

- `atDefinition` is initialized when you create an instance of `Properties`.
- “Compute 1” appears before “atDefinition:” which shows that initialization happens before any accesses.
- `getter` is computed every time you access it. “Compute 2” appears twice, once for each access to the property.
- The initialization value for `lazyInit` is only calculated the first time it is accessed. Initialization never happens if you don’t access that property—notice that “Compute 4” never appears in the trace.

***Exercises and solutions can be found at www.AtomicKotlin.com.***