# Late Initialization

> Sometimes you want to initialize properties of your class after it is created, but in a separate member function instead of using `lazy`.

For example, a framework or library might require initialization in a special function. If you extend that library class, you can provide your own implementation of that special function.

Consider a `Bag` interface with a `setUp()` that initializes instances:

```
// LateInitialization/Bag.kt
package lateinitialization

interface Bag {
  fun setUp()
}
```

Suppose we want to reuse a library that creates and manipulates `Bag`s and guarantees that `setUp()` is called. This library requires subclass initialization in `setUp()` instead of in a constructor:

```
// LateInitialization/Suitcase.kt
package lateinitialization
import atomictest.eq

class Suitcase : Bag {
  private var items: String? = null
  override fun setUp() {
    items = "socks, jacket, laptop"
  }
  fun checkSocks(): Boolean =
    items?.contains("socks") ?: false
}

fun main() {
  val suitcase = Suitcase()
  suitcase.setUp()
  suitcase.checkSocks() eq true
}
```

`Suitcase` initializes `items` by overriding `setUp()`. However, we can’t just define `items` as a `String`—if we do that, we must provide a non-null initializer in the constructor. Using a stub value such as an empty `String` is a bad practice because you never know whether it’s actually been initialized. `null` indicates that it’s not initialized.

Defining `items` as a nullable `String?` means we must check for `null` in all member functions, as in `checkSocks()`. However, we know that the library we’re reusing initializes `items` by calling `setUp()`, so the `null` checks should not be necessary.

The `lateinit` property modifier fixes this problem—here, we initialize `items` after creating an instance of `BetterSuitcase`:

```
// LateInitialization/BetterSuitcase.kt
package lateinitialization
import atomictest.eq

class BetterSuitcase : Bag {
  lateinit var items: String
  override fun setUp() {
    items = "socks, jacket, laptop"
  }
  fun checkSocks() = "socks" in items
}

fun main() {
  val suitcase = BetterSuitcase()
  suitcase.setUp()
  suitcase.checkSocks() eq true
}
```

Compare this version of `checkSocks()` with the one in `Suitcase.kt`. `lateinit` means `items` is safely defined as a non-nullable property.

`lateinit` can be used on a property inside the body of a class, a top-level property, or local `var`.

Limitations:

- `lateinit` can only be used on a `var` property, not a `val`.
- The property must be a non-nullable type.
- The property cannot be a primitive type.
- `lateinit` is not allowed for `abstract` properties in an `abstract` class or `interface`.
- `lateinit` is not allowed for properties with a custom `get()` or `set()`.

What happens if you forget to initialize such a property? You won’t get compile-time errors or warnings, because the initialization logic might be complex and depend on other properties that Kotlin can’t monitor:

```
// LateInitialization/FaultySuitcase.kt
package lateinitialization
import atomictest.*

class FaultySuitcase : Bag {
  lateinit var items: String
  override fun setUp() {}
  fun checkSocks() = "socks" in items
}

fun main() {
  val suitcase = FaultySuitcase()
  suitcase.setUp()
  capture {
    suitcase.checkSocks()
  } eq
    "UninitializedPropertyAccessException" +
    ": lateinit property items " +
    "has not been initialized"
}
```

This runtime exception has enough detail for you to easily discover and fix the problem. Tracking down an error reported by a `null` pointer exception is usually much more difficult.

`.isInitialized` will tell you whether a `lateinit` property been initialized. The property must be in your current scope, and is accessed using the `::` operator:

```
// LateInitialization/IsInitialized.kt
package lateinitialization
import atomictest.*

class WithLate {
  lateinit var x: String
  fun status() = "${::x.isInitialized}"
}

lateinit var y: String

fun main() {
  trace("${::y.isInitialized}")
  y = "Ready"
  trace("${::y.isInitialized}")
  val withlate = WithLate()
  trace(withlate.status())
  withlate.x = "Set"
  trace(withlate.status())
  trace eq "false true false true"
}
```

Although you can create a local `lateinit var`, you cannot call `.isInitialized` on it because references to local `var`s or `val`s are not supported.

***Exercises and solutions can be found at www.AtomicKotlin.com.***