# Variable Argument Lists

> The `vararg` keyword produces a flexibly-sized argument list.

In [Lists](javascript:void(0)) we introduced `listOf()`, which takes any number of parameters and produces a `List`:

```
// Varargs/ListOf.kt
import atomictest.eq

fun main() {
  listOf(1) eq "[1]"
  listOf("a", "b") eq "[a, b]"
}
```

Using the `vararg` keyword, you can define a function that takes any number of arguments, just like `listOf()` does. `vararg` is short for *variable argument list*:

```
// Varargs/VariableArgList.kt
package varargs

fun v(s: String, vararg d: Double) {}

fun main() {
  v("abc", 1.0, 2.0)
  v("def", 1.0, 2.0, 3.0, 4.0)
  v("ghi", 1.0, 2.0, 3.0, 4.0, 5.0, 6.0)
}
```

A function definition may specify only one parameter as `vararg`. Although it’s possible to specify any item in the parameter list as `vararg`, it’s usually simplest to do it for the last one.

`vararg` allows you to pass any number (including zero) of arguments. All arguments must be of the specified type. `vararg` arguments are accessed using the parameter name, which becomes an `Array`:

```
// Varargs/VarargSum.kt
package varargs
import atomictest.eq

fun sum(vararg numbers: Int): Int {
  var total = 0
  for (n in numbers) {
    total += n
  }
  return total
}

fun main() {
  sum(13, 27, 44) eq 84
  sum(1, 3, 5, 7, 9, 11) eq 36
  sum() eq 0
}
```

Although `Array`s and `List`s look similar, they are implemented differently—`List` is a regular library class while `Array` has special low-level support. `Array` comes from Kotlin’s requirement for compatibility with other languages, especially Java.

In day-to-day programming, use a `List` when you need a simple sequence. Use `Array`s only when a third-party API requires an `Array`, or when you’re dealing with `vararg`s.

In most cases you can just ignore the fact that `vararg` produces an `Array` and treat it as if it were a `List`:

```
// Varargs/VarargLikeList.kt
package varargs
import atomictest.eq

fun evaluate(vararg ints: Int) =
  "Size: ${ints.size}\n" +
  "Sum: ${ints.sum()}\n" +
  "Average: ${ints.average()}"

fun main() {
  evaluate(10, -3, 8, 1, 9) eq """
    Size: 5
    Sum: 25
    Average: 5.0
  """
}
```

You can pass an `Array` of elements wherever a `vararg` is accepted. To create an `Array`, use `arrayOf()` in the same way you use `listOf()`. Note that an `Array` is always mutable. To convert an `Array` into a sequence of arguments (not just a single element of type `Array`), use the *spread operator*, `*`:

```
// Varargs/SpreadOperator.kt
import varargs.sum
import atomictest.eq

fun main() {
  val array = intArrayOf(4, 5)
  sum(1, 2, 3, *array, 6) eq 21  // [1]
  // Doesn't compile:
  // sum(1, 2, 3, array, 6)

  val list = listOf(9, 10, 11)
  sum(*list.toIntArray()) eq 30  // [2]
}
```

If you pass an `Array` of primitive types (like `Int`, `Double` or `Boolean`) as in the example above, the `Array` creation function must be specifically typed. If you use `arrayOf(4, 5)` instead of `intArrayOf(4, 5)`, line `[1]` will produce an error complaining that *inferred type is `Array<Int>` but IntArray was expected*.

The spread operator only works with arrays. If you have a `List` that you want to pass as a sequence of arguments, first convert it to an `Array` and then apply the spread operator, as in **[2]**. Because the result is an `Array` of a primitive type, we must again use the specific conversion function `toIntArray()`.

The spread operator is especially helpful when you must pass `vararg` arguments to another function that also expects `vararg`s:

```
// Varargs/TwoFunctionsWithVarargs.kt
package varargs
import atomictest.eq

fun first(vararg numbers: Int): String {
  var result = ""
  for (i in numbers) {
    result += "[$i]"
  }
  return result
}

fun second(vararg numbers: Int) =
  first(*numbers)

fun main() {
  second(7, 9, 32) eq "[7][9][32]"
}
```

### Command-Line Arguments

When invoking a program on the command line, you can pass it a variable number of arguments. To capture command-line arguments, you must provide a particular parameter to `main()`:

```
// Varargs/MainArgs.kt

fun main(args: Array<String>) {
  for (a in args) {
    println(a)
  }
}
```

The parameter is traditionally called `args` (although you can call it anything), and the type for `args` can only be `Array<String>` (`Array` of `String`).

If you are using IntelliJ IDEA, you can pass program arguments by editing the corresponding “Run configuration,” as shown in the last exercise for this atom.

You can also use the `kotlinc` compiler to produce a command-line program. If `kotlinc` isn’t on your computer, follow the instructions on the [Kotlin main site](https://kotlinlang.org/). Once you’ve entered and saved the code for `MainArgs.kt`, type the following at a command prompt:

```
kotlinc MainArgs.kt
```

You provide the command-line arguments following the program invocation, like this:

```
kotlin MainArgsKt hamster 42 3.14159
```

You’ll see this output:

```
hamster
42
3.14159
```

If you want to turn a `String` parameter into a specific type, Kotlin provides conversion functions, such as a `toInt()` for converting to an `Int`, and `toFloat()` for converting to a `Float`. Using these assumes that the command-line arguments appear in a particular order. Here, the program expects a `String`, followed by something convertible to an `Int`, followed by something convertible to a `Float`:

```
// Varargs/MainArgConversion.kt

fun main(args: Array<String>) {
  if (args.size < 3) return
  val first = args[0]
  val second = args[1].toInt()
  val third = args[2].toFloat()
  println("$first  $second  $third")
}
```

The first line in `main()` quits the program if there aren’t enough arguments. If you don’t provide something convertible to an `Int` and a `Float` as the second and third command-line arguments, you will see runtime errors (try it to see the errors).

Compile and run `MainArgConversion.kt` with the same command-line arguments we used before, and you’ll see:

  `hamster  42  3.14159`

***Exercises and solutions can be found at www.AtomicKotlin.com.***