# Constructors

> You initialize a new object by passing information to a *constructor*.

Each object is an isolated world. A program is a collection of objects, so correct initialization of each individual object solves a large part of the initialization problem. Kotlin includes mechanisms to guarantee proper object initialization.

A constructor is like a special member function that initializes a new object. The simplest form of a constructor is a single-line class definition:

```
// Constructors/Wombat.kt

class Wombat

fun main() {
  val wombat = Wombat()
}
```

In `main()`, calling `Wombat()` creates a `Wombat` object. If you are coming from another object-oriented language you might expect to see a `new` keyword used here, but `new` would be redundant in Kotlin so it was omitted.

You pass information to a constructor using a parameter list, just like a function. Here, the `Alien` constructor takes a single argument:

```
// Constructors/Arg.kt

class Alien(name: String) {
  val greeting = "Poor $name!"
}

fun main() {
  val alien = Alien("Mr. Meeseeks")
  println(alien.greeting)
  // alien.name // Error     // [1]
}
/* Output:
Poor Mr. Meeseeks!
*/
```

Creating an `Alien` object requires the argument (try it without one). `name` initializes the `greeting` property within the constructor, but it is not accessible outside the constructor—try uncommenting line **[1]**.

If you want the constructor parameter to be accessible outside the class body, define it as a `var` or `val` in the parameter list:

```
// Constructors/VisibleArgs.kt

class MutableNameAlien(var name: String)

class FixedNameAlien(val name: String)

fun main() {
  val alien1 =
    MutableNameAlien("Reverse Giraffe")
  val alien2 =
    FixedNameAlien("Krombopolis Michael")

  alien1.name = "Parasite"
  // Can't do this:
  // alien2.name = "Parasite"
}
```

These class definitions have no explicit class bodies—the bodies are implied.

When `name` is defined as a `var` or `val`, it becomes a property and is thus accessible outside the constructor. `val` constructor parameters cannot be changed, while `var` constructor parameters are mutable.

Your class can have numerous constructor parameters:

```
// Constructors/MultipleArgs.kt

class AlienSpecies(
  val name: String,
  val eyes: Int,
  val hands: Int,
  val legs: Int
) {
  fun describe() =
    "$name with $eyes eyes, " +
      "$hands hands and $legs legs"
}

fun main() {
  val kevin =
    AlienSpecies("Zigerion", 2, 2, 2)
  val mortyJr =
    AlienSpecies("Gazorpian", 2, 6, 2)
  println(kevin.describe())
  println(mortyJr.describe())
}
/* Output:
Zigerion with 2 eyes, 2 hands and 2 legs
Gazorpian with 2 eyes, 6 hands and 2 legs
*/
```

In [Complex Constructors](javascript:void(0)), you’ll see that constructors can also contain complex initialization logic.

If an object is used when a `String` is expected, Kotlin calls the object’s `toString()` member function. If you don’t write one, you still get a default `toString()`:

```
// Constructors/DisplayAlienSpecies.kt

fun main() {
  val krombopulosMichael =
    AlienSpecies("Gromflomite", 2, 2, 2)
  println(krombopulosMichael)
}
/* Sample output:
AlienSpecies@4d7e1886
*/
```

The default `toString()` isn’t very useful—it produces the class name and the physical address of the object (this varies from one program execution to the next). You can define your own `toString()`:

```
// Constructors/Scientist.kt

class Scientist(val name: String) {
  override fun toString(): String {
    return "Scientist('$name')"
  }
}

fun main() {
  val zeep = Scientist("Zeep Xanflorp")
  println(zeep)
}
/* Output:
Scientist('Zeep Xanflorp')
*/
```

`override` is a new keyword for us. It is required here because `toString()` already has a definition, the one producing the primitive result. `override` tells Kotlin that yes, we do actually want to replace the default `toString()` with our own definition. The explicitness of `override` clarifies the code and prevents mistakes.

A `toString()` that displays the contents of an object in a convenient form is useful for finding and fixing programming errors. To simplify the process of *debugging*, IDEs provide [*debuggers*](https://www.jetbrains.com/help/idea/debugging-code.html) that allow you to observe each step in the execution of a program and to see inside your objects.

***Exercises and solutions can be found at www.AtomicKotlin.com.***