# `break` & `continue`

> `break` and `continue` allow you to “jump” within a loop.

Early programmers wrote directly to the processor, using either numerical *opcodes* as instructions, or *assembly language*, which translates into opcodes. This kind of programming is as low-level as you can get. For example, many coding decisions were facilitated by “jumping” directly to other places in the code. Early higher-level languages (including FORTRAN, ALGOL, Pascal, C and C++) duplicated this practice by implementing a `goto` keyword.

`goto` made assembly-language programmers more comfortable as they transitioned to higher-level languages. As we accumulated more experience, however, the programming community discovered that unconditional jumps produce complicated and un-maintainable code. This generated a large backlash against `goto`, and most subsequent languages have avoided any kind of unconditional jump.

Kotlin provides a *constrained jump* in the form of `break` and `continue`. These are tied to the looping constructs `for`, `while` and `do-while`—you can only use `break` and `continue` from within such loops. In addition, `continue` can only jump to the beginning of a loop, and `break` can only jump to the end of a loop.

In practice you rarely use `break` and `continue` when writing new Kotlin code. These features are artifacts from earlier languages. Although they are occasionally useful, you’ll learn in this book that Kotlin provides superior mechanisms.

Here’s an example with a `for` loop containing both a `continue` and a `break`:

```
// BreakAndContinue/ForControl.kt
import atomictest.eq

fun main() {
  val nums = mutableListOf(0)
  for (i in 4 until 100 step 4) { // [1]
    if (i == 8) continue          // [2]
    if (i == 40) break            // [3]
    nums.add(i)
  }                               // [4]
  nums eq "[0, 4, 12, 16, 20, 24, 28, 32, 36]"
}
```

The example aggregates `Int`s into a mutable `List`. The `continue` at **[2]** jumps back to the beginning of the loop, which is the opening brace at **[1]**. It “continues” execution starting with the next iteration of the loop. Note that the code following `continue` inside the `for` loop body is *not* executed: `nums.add(i)` is not called when `i == 8` so you don’t see it in the resulting `nums`.

When `i == 40`, `break` is executed at **[3]**, which “breaks out” of the `for` loop by jumping to the end of its scope at **[4]**. The numbers beginning at `40` are not added to the resulting `List` because the `for` loop stops executing.

Lines **[2]** and **[3]** are interchangeable because their logic doesn’t overlap. Try swapping the lines and verify that the output doesn’t change.

We can rewrite `ForControl.kt` using a `while` loop:

```
// BreakAndContinue/WhileControl.kt
import atomictest.eq

fun main() {
  val nums = mutableListOf(0)
  var i = 0
  while (i < 100) {
    i += 4
    if (i == 8) continue
    if (i == 40) break
    nums.add(i)
  }
  nums eq "[0, 4, 12, 16, 20, 24, 28, 32, 36]"
}
```

The `break` and `continue` behavior remains the same, as it does for a `do`-`while` loop:

```
// BreakAndContinue/DoWhileControl.kt
import atomictest.eq

fun main() {
  val nums = mutableListOf(0)
  var i = 0
  do {
    i += 4
    if (i == 8) continue
    if (i == 40) break
    nums.add(i)
  } while (i < 100)
  nums eq "[0, 4, 12, 16, 20, 24, 28, 32, 36]"
}
```

A `do`-`while` loop always executes at least once, because the `while` test is at the end of the loop.

### Labels

Plain `break` and `continue` can jump no further than the boundaries of their local loop. *Labels* allow `break` and `continue` to jump to the boundaries of *enclosing* loops, so you aren’t limited to the scope of the current loop.

You create a label by using `label@`, where `label` can be any name. Here, the label is `outer`:

```
// BreakAndContinue/ForLabeled.kt
import atomictest.eq

fun main() {
  val strings = mutableListOf<String>()
  outer@ for (c in 'a'..'e') {
    for (i in 1..9) {
      if (i == 5) continue@outer
      if ("$c$i" == "c3") break@outer
      strings.add("$c$i")
    }
  }
  strings eq listOf("a1", "a2", "a3", "a4",
    "b1", "b2", "b3", "b4", "c1", "c2")
}
```

The labeled `continue` expression `continue@outer` continues back to the label `outer@`. The labeled `break` expression `break@outer` finds the end of the block named `outer@`, and proceeds from there.

Labels work with `while` and `do`-`while`:

```
// BreakAndContinue/WhileLabeled.kt
import atomictest.eq

fun main() {
  val strings = mutableListOf<String>()
  var c = 'a' - 1
  outer@ while (c < 'f') {
    c += 1
    var i = 0
    do {
      i++
      if (i == 5) continue@outer
      if ("$c$i" == "c3") break@outer
      strings.add("$c$i")
    } while (i < 10)
  }
  strings eq listOf("a1", "a2", "a3", "a4",
    "b1", "b2", "b3", "b4", "c1", "c2")
}
```

`WhileLabeled.kt` can be rewritten as:

```
// BreakAndContinue/Improved.kt
import atomictest.eq

fun main() {
  val strings = mutableListOf<String>()
  for (c in 'a'..'c') {
    for (i in 1..4) {
      val value = "$c$i"
      if (value < "c3") {     // [1]
        strings.add(value)
      }
    }
  }
  strings eq listOf("a1", "a2", "a3", "a4",
    "b1", "b2", "b3", "b4", "c1", "c2")
}
```

This is far more comprehensible. In line **[1]**, we only add `String`s that occur (alphabetically) before `"c3"`. This produces the same behavior as using `break` when reaching `"c3"` in the previous versions of the example.

- \-

`break` and `continue` tend to create complicated and un-maintainable code. Although these jumps are somewhat more civilized than “goto,” they still interrupt program flow. Code without jumps is almost always easier to understand.

In some cases, you can write the conditions for iteration explicitly instead of using `break` and `continue`, as we did in the example above. In other cases, you can restructure your code and introduce new functions. Both `break` and `continue` can be replaced with `return` if you extract the whole loop or the loop body into new functions. In the next section, [Functional Programming](javascript:void(0)), you’ll learn to write clear code without using `break` and `continue`.

Consider alternative approaches, and choose the simpler and more readable solution. This typically won’t include `break` and `continue`.

***Exercises and solutions can be found at www.AtomicKotlin.com.***