# Data Classes

> Kotlin reduces repetitive coding.

The `class` mechanism performs a fair amount of work for you. However, creating classes that primarily hold data still requires a significant amount of repetitive code. When you need a class that’s essentially a data holder, `data` classes simplify your code and perform common tasks.

You define a `data` class using the `data` keyword, which tells Kotlin to generate additional functionality. Each constructor parameter must be preceded by `var` or `val`:

```
// DataClasses/Simple.kt
package dataclasses
import atomictest.eq

data class Simple(
  val arg1: String,
  var arg2: Int
)

fun main() {
  val s1 = Simple("Hi", 29)
  val s2 = Simple("Hi", 29)
  s1 eq "Simple(arg1=Hi, arg2=29)"
  s1 eq s2
}
```

This example reveals two features of `data` classes:

1. The `String` produced by `s1` is different than what we usually see; it includes the parameter names and values of the data held by the object. `data` classes display objects in a nice, readable format without requiring any additional code.
2. If you create two instances of the same `data` class containing identical data (equal values for properties), you probably also want those two instances to be equal. To achieve that behavior for a regular class, you must define a special function `equals()` to compare instances. In `data` classes, this function is automatically generated; it compares the values of all properties specified as constructor parameters.

Here’s an ordinary class `Person` and a `data` class `Contact`:

```
// DataClasses/DataClasses.kt
package dataclasses
import atomictest.*

class Person(val name: String)

data class Contact(
  val name: String,
  val number: String
)

fun main() {
  // These seem the same, but they're not:
  Person("Cleo") neq Person("Cleo")
  // A data class defines equality sensibly:
  Contact("Miffy", "1-234-567890") eq
  Contact("Miffy", "1-234-567890")
}
/* Sample output:
dataclasses.Person@54bedef2
Contact(name=Miffy, number=1-234-567890)
*/
```

Because the `Person` class is defined without the `data` keyword, two instances containing the same `name` are not equal. Fortunately, creating `Contact` as a `data` class produces a reasonable result.

Notice the difference between the display format of the `data` class, and `Person`, which just shows default object information.

Another useful function generated for every `data` class is `copy()`, which creates a new object containing the data from the current object. However, it also allows you to change selected values in the process:

```
// DataClasses/CopyDataClass.kt
package dataclasses
import atomictest.eq

data class DetailedContact(
  val name: String,
  val surname: String,
  val number: String,
  val address: String
)

fun main() {
  val contact = DetailedContact(
    "Miffy",
    "Miller",
    "1-234-567890",
    "1600 Amphitheatre Parkway")
  val newContact = contact.copy(
    number = "098-765-4321",
    address = "Brandschenkestrasse 110")
  newContact eq DetailedContact(
    "Miffy",
    "Miller",
    "098-765-4321",
    "Brandschenkestrasse 110")
}
```

The parameter names for `copy()` are identical to the constructor parameters. All arguments have default values that are equal to the current values, so you provide only the ones you want to replace.

### `HashMap` and `HashSet`

Creating a `data` class also generates an appropriate *hash function* so that objects can be used as keys in `HashMap`s and `HashSet`s:

```
// DataClasses/HashCode.kt
package dataclasses
import atomictest.eq

data class Key(val name: String, val id: Int)

fun main() {
  val korvo: Key = Key("Korvo", 19)
  korvo.hashCode() eq -2041757108
  val map = HashMap<Key, String>()
  map[korvo] = "Alien"
  map[korvo] eq "Alien"
  val set = HashSet<Key>()
  set.add(korvo)
  set.contains(korvo) eq true
}
```

`hashCode()` is used in conjunction with `equals()` to rapidly look up a `Key` in a `HashMap` or a `HashSet`. Creating a correct `hashCode()` by hand is tricky and error-prone, so it is quite beneficial to have the `data` class do it for you. [Operator Overloading](javascript:void(0)) covers `equals()` and `hashCode()` in more detail.

***Exercises and solutions can be found at www.AtomicKotlin.com.***