# Destructuring Declarations

> Suppose you want to return more than one item from a function, such as a result along with some information about that result.

The `Pair` class, which is part of the standard library, allows you to return two values:

```
// Destructuring/Pairs.kt
package destructuring
import atomictest.eq

fun compute(input: Int): Pair<Int, String> =
  if (input > 5)
    Pair(input * 2, "High")
  else
    Pair(input * 2, "Low")

fun main() {
  compute(7) eq Pair(14, "High")
  compute(4) eq Pair(8, "Low")
  val result = compute(5)
  result.first eq 10
  result.second eq "Low"
}
```

We specify the return type of `compute()` as `Pair<Int, String>`. A `Pair` is a parameterized type, like `List` or `Set`.

Returning multiple values is helpful, but we’d also like a convenient way to unpack the results. As shown above, you can access the components of a `Pair` using its `first` and `second` properties, but you can also declare and initialize several identifiers simultaneously using a *destructuring declaration*:

```
val (a, b, c) = composedValue
```

This destructures a composed value and positionally assigns its components. The syntax differs from defining a single identifier—for destructuring, you put the names of the identifiers inside parentheses.

Here’s a destructuring declaration for the `Pair` returned from `compute()`:

```
// Destructuring/PairDestructuring.kt
import destructuring.compute
import atomictest.eq

fun main() {
  val (value, description) = compute(7)
  value eq 14
  description eq "High"
}
```

The `Triple` class combines three values, but that’s as far as it goes. This is intentional: if you need to store more values, or if you find yourself using many `Pair`s or `Triple`s, consider creating special classes instead.

[`data` Classes](javascript:void(0)) automatically allow destructuring declarations:

```
// Destructuring/Computation.kt
package destructuring
import atomictest.eq

data class Computation(
  val data: Int,
  val info: String
)

fun evaluate(input: Int) =
  if (input > 5)
    Computation(input * 2, "High")
  else
    Computation(input * 2, "Low")

fun main() {
  val (value, description) = evaluate(7)
  value eq 14
  description eq "High"
}
```

It’s clearer to return a `Computation` instead of a `Pair<Int, String>`. Choosing a good name for the result is almost as important as choosing a good self-explanatory name for the function itself. Adding or removing `Computation` information is simpler if it’s a separate class rather than a `Pair`.

When you unpack an instance of a `data` class, you must assign values to the new identifiers in the same order you define the properties in the class:

```
// Destructuring/Tuple.kt
package destructuring
import atomictest.eq

data class Tuple(
  val i: Int,
  val d: Double,
  val s: String,
  val b: Boolean,
  val l: List<Int>
)

fun main() {
  val tuple = Tuple(
    1, 3.14, "Mouse", false, listOf())
  val (i, d, s, b, l) = tuple
  i eq 1
  d eq 3.14
  s eq "Mouse"
  b eq false
  l eq listOf()

  val (_, _, animal) = tuple   // [1]
  animal eq "Mouse"
}
```

- **[1]** If you don’t need some of the identifiers, you may use underscores instead of their names, or omit them completely if they appear at the end. Here, the unpacked values `1` and `3.14` are discarded using underscores, `"Mouse"` is captured into `animal`, and `false` and the empty `List` are discarded because they are at the end of the list.

The properties of a `data` class are assigned by order, not by name. If you destructure an object and later add a property anywhere except the end of its `data` class, that new property will be destructured on top of your previous identifier, producing unexpected results (see Exercise 3). If your custom `data` class has properties with identical types, the compiler can’t detect misuse so you may want to avoid destructuring it. Destructuring library `data` classes like `Pair` or `Triple` is safe, because they don’t change.

Using a `for` loop, you can iterate over a `Map` or a `List` of pairs (or other `data` classes) and destructure each element:

```
// Destructuring/ForLoop.kt
import atomictest.eq

fun main() {
  var result = ""
  val map = mapOf(1 to "one", 2 to "two")
  for ((key, value) in map) {
    result += "$key = $value, "
  }
  result eq "1 = one, 2 = two,"

  result = ""
  val listOfPairs =
    listOf(Pair(1, "one"), Pair(2, "two"))
  for ((i, s) in listOfPairs) {
    result += "($i, $s), "
  }
  result eq "(1, one), (2, two),"
}
```

`withIndex()` is a standard library extension function for `List`. It returns a collection of `IndexedValue`s, which can be destructured:

```
// Destructuring/LoopWithIndex.kt
import atomictest.trace

fun main() {
  val list = listOf('a', 'b', 'c')
  for ((index, value) in list.withIndex()) {
    trace("$index:$value")
  }
  trace eq "0:a 1:b 2:c"
}
```

Destructuring declarations are only allowed for local `var`s and `val`s, and cannot be used to create class properties.

***Exercises and solutions can be found at www.AtomicKotlin.com.***