# Inheritance

> *Inheritance* is a mechanism for creating a new class by reusing and modifying an existing class.

Objects store data in properties and perform actions via member functions. Each object occupies a unique place in storage so one object’s properties can have different values from every other object. An object also belongs to a category called a class, which determines the form (properties and functions) for its objects. Thus, an object looks like the class that formed it.

Creating and debugging a class can require extensive work. What if you want to make a class that’s similar to an existing class, but with some variations? It seems wasteful to build a new class from scratch. Object-oriented languages provide a mechanism for reuse called *inheritance*.

Inheritance follows the concept of biological inheritance. You say, “I want to make a new class from an existing class, but with some additions and modifications.”

The syntax for inheritance is similar to implementing an interface. To inherit a new class `Derived` from an existing class `Base`, use a `:` (colon):

```
// Inheritance/BasicInheritance.kt
package inheritance

open class Base

class Derived : Base()
```

The subsequent atom explains the reason for the parentheses after `Base` during inheritance.

The terms *base class* and *derived class* (or *parent class* and *child class*, or *superclass* and *subclass*) are often used to describe the inheritance relationship.

The base class must be `open`. A non-`open` class doesn’t allow inheritance—it is *closed* by default. This differs from most other object-oriented languages. In Java, for example, a class is automatically inheritable unless you explicitly forbid inheritance by declaring that class to be `final`. Although Kotlin allows it, the `final` modifier is redundant because every class is effectively `final` by default:

```
// Inheritance/OpenAndFinalClasses.kt
package inheritance

// This class can be inherited:
open class Parent

class Child : Parent()

// Child is not open, so this fails:
// class GrandChild : Child()

// This class can't be inherited:
final class Single

// The same as using 'final':
class AnotherSingle
```

Kotlin forces you to clarify your intent by using the `open` keyword to specify that a class is designed for inheritance.

In the following example, `GreatApe` is a base class, and has two properties with fixed values. The derived classes `Bonobo`, `Chimpanzee` and `BonoboB` are new types that are identical to their parent class:

```
// Inheritance/GreatApe.kt
package inheritance.ape1
import atomictest.eq

open class GreatApe {
  val weight = 100.0
  val age = 12
}

open class Bonobo : GreatApe()
class Chimpanzee : GreatApe()
class BonoboB : Bonobo()

fun GreatApe.info() = "wt: $weight age: $age"

fun main() {
  GreatApe().info() eq "wt: 100.0 age: 12"
  Bonobo().info() eq "wt: 100.0 age: 12"
  Chimpanzee().info() eq "wt: 100.0 age: 12"
  BonoboB().info() eq "wt: 100.0 age: 12"
}
```

`info()` is an extension for `GreatApe`, so naturally you can call it on a `GreatApe`. But notice that you can also call `info()` on a `Bonobo`, a `Chimpanzee`, or a `BonoboB`! Even though the latter three are distinct types, Kotlin happily accepts them as if they were the *same type* as `GreatApe`. This works at any level of inheritance—`BonoboB` is two inheritance levels away from `GreatApe`.

Inheritance guarantees that anything inheriting from `GreatApe` *is* a `GreatApe`. All code that acts upon objects of the derived classes knows that `GreatApe` is at their core, so any functions and properties in `GreatApe` will also be available in its child classes.

Inheritance enables you to write a single piece of code (the `info()` function) that works not just with one class, but also with every class that inherits that class. Thus, inheritance creates opportunities for code simplification and reuse.

`GreatApe.kt` is a bit *too* simple because all the classes are identical. Inheritance gets interesting when you start *overriding* functions, which means redefining a function from a base class to do something different in a derived class.

Let’s look at another version of `GreatApe.kt`. This time we include member functions that are modified in the subclasses:

```
// Inheritance/GreatApe2.kt
package inheritance.ape2
import atomictest.eq

open class GreatApe {
  protected var energy = 0
  open fun call() = "Hoo!"
  open fun eat() {
    energy += 10
  }
  fun climb(x: Int) {
    energy -= x
  }
  fun energyLevel() = "Energy: $energy"
}

class Bonobo : GreatApe() {
  override fun call() = "Eep!"
  override fun eat() {
    // Modify the base-class var:
    energy += 10
    // Call the base-class version:
    super.eat()
  }
  // Add a function:
  fun run() = "Bonobo run"
}

class Chimpanzee : GreatApe() {
  // New property:
  val additionalEnergy = 20
  override fun call() = "Yawp!"
  override fun eat() {
    energy += additionalEnergy
    super.eat()
  }
  // Add a function:
  fun jump() = "Chimp jump"
}

fun talk(ape: GreatApe): String {
  // ape.run()  // Not an ape function
  // ape.jump() // Nor this
  ape.eat()
  ape.climb(10)
  return "${ape.call()} ${ape.energyLevel()}"
}

fun main() {
  // Cannot access 'energy':
  // GreatApe().energy
  talk(GreatApe()) eq "Hoo! Energy: 0"
  talk(Bonobo()) eq "Eep! Energy: 10"
  talk(Chimpanzee()) eq "Yawp! Energy: 20"
}
```

Every `GreatApe` has a `call()`. They store `energy` when they `eat()` and they expend energy when they `climb()`.

As described in [Constraining Visibility](javascript:void(0)), the derived class can’t access the `private` members of the base class. Sometimes the creator of the base class would like to take a particular member and grant access to derived classes but not to the world in general. That’s what `protected` does: `protected` members are closed to the outside world, but can be accessed or overridden in subclasses.

If we declare `energy` as `private`, it won’t be possible to change it whenever `GreatApe` is used, which is good, but we also can’t access it in subclasses. Making it `protected` allows us to keep it accessible to subclasses but invisible to the outside world.

`call()` is defined the same way in `Bonobo` and `Chimpanzee` as it is in `GreatApe`. It has no parameters and type inference determines that it returns a `String`.

Both `Bonobo` and `Chimpanzee` should have different behaviors for `call()` than `GreatApe`, so we want to change their definitions of `call()`. If you create an identical function signature in a derived class as in a base class, you substitute the behavior defined in the base class with your new behavior. This is called *overriding*.

When Kotlin sees an identical function signature in the derived class as in the base class, it decides that you’ve made a mistake, called an *accidental override*. If you write a function that has the same name as a function in the base class, you get an error message saying you forgot the `override` keyword. Kotlin assumes you’ve unintentionally chosen the same name, parameters and return type *unless* you use the `override` keyword (which you first saw in [Constructors](javascript:void(0))) to say “yes, I mean to do this.” The `override` keyword also helps when reading the code, so you don’t have to compare signatures to notice the overrides.

Kotlin imposes an additional constraint when overriding functions. Just as you cannot inherit from a base class unless that base class is `open`, you cannot `override` a function from a base class unless that function is defined as `open` in the base class. Note that `climb()` and `energyLevel()` are not `open`, so they cannot be overridden. Inheritance and overriding cannot be accomplished in Kotlin without clear intentions.

It’s especially interesting to take a `Bonobo` or a `Chimpanzee` and treat it as an ordinary `GreatApe`. Inside `talk()`, `call()` produces the correct behavior in each case. `talk()` somehow knows the exact type of the object and produces the appropriate variation of `call()`. This is [polymorphism](javascript:void(0)).

Inside `talk()`, you can only call `GreatApe` member functions because `talk()`’s parameter is a `GreatApe`. Even though `Bonobo` defines `run()` and `Chimpanzee` defines `jump()`, neither function is part of `GreatApe`.

Often when you override a function, you want to call the base-class version of that function (for one thing, to reuse the code), as seen in the overrides for `eat()`. This produces a conundrum: If you simply call `eat()`, you call the same function you’re currently inside (as we’ve seen in [Recursion](javascript:void(0))). To call the base-class version of `eat()`, use the `super` keyword, short for “superclass.”

***Exercises and solutions can be found at www.AtomicKotlin.com.***