# Complex Constructors

> For code to work correctly, objects must be properly initialized.

A constructor is a special function that creates a new object. In [Constructors](javascript:void(0)), we saw simple constructors that only initialize their arguments. Using `var` or `val` in the parameter list makes those parameters properties, accessible from outside the object:

```
// ComplexConstructors/SimpleConstructor.kt
package complexconstructors
import atomictest.eq

class Alien(val name: String)

fun main() {
  val alien = Alien("Pencilvester")
  alien.name eq "Pencilvester"
}
```

In these cases, we don’t write constructor code—Kotlin does it for us. For more customization, add constructor code in the class body. Code inside the `init` section is executed during object creation:

```
// ComplexConstructors/InitSection.kt
package complexconstructors
import atomictest.eq

private var counter = 0

class Message(text: String) {
  private val content: String
  init {
    counter += 10
    content = "[$counter] $text"
  }
  override fun toString() = content
}

fun main() {
  val m1 = Message("Big ba-da boom!")
  m1 eq "[10] Big ba-da boom!"
  val m2 = Message("Bzzzzt!")
  m2 eq "[20] Bzzzzt!"
}
```

Constructor parameters are accessible inside the `init` section even if they aren’t marked as properties using `var` or `val`.

Although defined as `val`, `content` is not initialized at the point of definition. In this case, Kotlin ensures that initialization occurs at one (and only one) point during construction. Either reassigning `content` or forgetting to initialize it produces an error message.

- \-

A constructor is the combination of its constructor parameter list—initialized before entering the class body—and the `init` section(s), executed during object creation. Kotlin allows multiple `init` sections, which are executed in definition order. However, in a large and complex class, spreading out the `init` sections may produce maintenance issues for programmers who are accustomed to a single `init` section.

***Exercises and solutions can be found at www.AtomicKotlin.com.***