# Resource Cleanup

> Using `try`-`finally` blocks for resource cleanup is tedious and error-prone. Kotlin’s library functions manage cleanup for you.

As you learned in [Exception Handling](javascript:void(0)), the `finally` clause cleans up resources regardless of how the `try` block exits. But what if an exception can happen while closing a resource? You end up with another `try` inside the `finally` clause. On top of that, if one exception is thrown inside a `try` and another while closing the resource, the latter shouldn’t conceal the former. Ensuring proper cleanup becomes very messy.

To reduce this complexity, Kotlin’s `use()` guarantees proper cleanup of closeable resources, liberating you from handwritten cleanup code.

`use()` works with any object that implements Java’s `AutoCloseable` interface. It executes the code within the block, then calls `close()` on the object, regardless of how you exit the block—either normally (including via `return`), or through an exception.

`use()` rethrows all exceptions, so you must still deal with those exceptions.

Predefined classes that work with `use()` are found in the Java documentation for `AutoCloseable`. For example, to read lines from a `File` we apply `use()` to a `BufferedReader`. `DataFile` from [Check Instructions](javascript:void(0)) inherits `java.io.File`:

```
// ResourceCleanup/AutoCloseable.kt
import atomictest.eq
import checkinstructions.DataFile

fun main() {
  DataFile("Results.txt")
    .bufferedReader()
    .use { it.readLines().first() } eq
    "Results"
}
```

`useLines()` opens a `File` object, extracts all its lines, and passes those lines to a target function (typically a lambda):

```
// ResourceCleanup/UseLines.kt
import atomictest.eq
import checkinstructions.DataFile

fun main() {
  DataFile("Results.txt").useLines {
    it.filter { "#" in it }.first()    // [1]
  } eq "# ok"
  DataFile("Results.txt").useLines { lines ->
    lines.filter { line ->             // [2]
      "#" in line
    }.first()
  } eq "# ok"
}
```

- **[1]** The left-hand `it` refers to the collection of lines in the file, while the right-hand `it` refers to each individual line. To reduce confusion, avoid writing code with two different nearby `it`s.
- **[2]** Named arguments prevent confusion from too many `it`s.

Everything happens within the `useLines()` lambda; outside the lambda the file contents are unavailable unless you explicitly return them. As it closes the file, `useLines()` returns the result of the lambda.

`forEachLine()` makes it easy to apply an action to each line in a file:

```
// ResourceCleanup/ForEachLine.kt
import checkinstructions.DataFile
import atomictest.*

fun main() {
  DataFile("Results.txt").forEachLine {
    if (it.startsWith("#"))
      trace("$it")
  }
  trace eq "# ok"
}
```

The lambda in `forEachLine()` returns `Unit`, which means that anything you do with the lines must be achieved through side effects. In functional programming, we prefer returning results over side effects, and thus `useLines()` is a more functional approach than `forEachLine()`. However, `forEachLine()` is a quick solution for simple utilities.

You can create your own class that works with `use()` by implementing the `AutoCloseable` interface, which contains only the `close()` function:

```
// ResourceCleanup/Usable.kt
package resourcecleanup
import atomictest.*

class Usable() : AutoCloseable {
  fun func() = trace("func()")
  override fun close() = trace("close()")
}

fun main() {
  Usable().use { it.func() }
  trace eq "func() close()"
}
```

`use()` ensures resource cleanup at the point the resource is created, rather than forcing you to write cleanup code when you’re finished with the resource.

***Exercises and solutions can be found at www.AtomicKotlin.com.***